---
title: Discord to start requiring face scan or ID to access adult content
link: https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/articles/c1d67vdlk1ko
date: 2026-02-12T19:55:00
tags:
  - privacy
  - discord
---

Discord have decided that they're going to require age verification for all users, even though they
have already [leaked a lot of IDs]. Discord have clarified their position, asserting that they're
not going to be collecting any sensitive information from users.

> For the majority of adult users, we will be able to confirm your age group using information we
> already have.

Given that they don't say what information they've already got that they can use to confirm my
age, I'm going to assume that it's more than I'd be comfortable with them using.

> When additional confirmation is required, we offer multiple privacy-forward options through
> trusted partners.

I think we all have a fairly good idea of what corporate trust actually means. Discord go on to
clarify further that neither Discord nor their "trusted" partners are going to receive any of the
information that was used to verify our ages.

> - Facial scans never leave your device. Discord and our vendor partners never receive it.
> - IDs are used to get your age only and then deleted.
> - Discord only receives your age — that’s it. Your identity is never associated with your account.

Surely neither Discord nor these partners will adjust their policies at any point to start capturing
this information. That's never happened before. Although, they might have to in response to some of
the [bypass] scripts that have been released.

> <mark>k-id, the age verification provider discord uses doesn't store or send your face to the
> server.</mark> instead, it sends a bunch of metadata about your face and general process details.
> while this is good for your privacy (well, considering some other providers send actual videos of
> your face to their servers), its also bad for them, because we can just send legitimate looking
> metadata to their servers and they have no way to tell its not legitimate.

[leaked a lot of IDs]: https://www.theregister.com/2025/10/09/discord_photo_ids_leaked/
[bypass]: https://age-verifier.kibty.town/
